omur
[Music]
brah
now with the bhagan grace let us
continue from where we left
off we were in the last
section
25 and and
um at that time the
buddhi the mind is controlled by
buddhi budhi is nothing but
discrimination is nothing but
discrimination that discriminates
between the permanent and the temporary
permanent and the temporary that's all
so it tells you this is temporary and
this is permanent that's all it does so
that the N means to tend towards to
Incline towards so the mind now
inin managed and controlled
by the
mind it is Flowing towards Liberation
itself it is now tending towards
Liberation and attaching itself to
it number 26
see when that happen when the my budhi
direct the Mind towards the the indwell
the Selfless Love That within each one
of us then what
happens
chra okay chra chra mean subsequently
Andra means um something that is um
um you know when you got when you got a
water in a pot right and there is a
small leak in there so that thing leaks
out right so that leaking tendency that
um that is
um the another way to look at it is also
something that relaxes
okay if you can follow it because what
why we are not able to relax
because all our worries and everything
does not
leak it contain with right so when soall
self-imposed burdens they all start
leaking away what happens to the mind it
actually relaxes right so that's the
meaning of the word chra okay so that's
why that the beautiful word so that at
that
time subsequently
subsequent to is all the things all
these all these whatever you may say
Okay mind starts relaxing
an all
the means the all the agitations that we
go through the mental agitation that
they go through all those anani they all
come to an end because the mind start
relaxing okay
number
now the
um the another uh meaning of of that
word 26 let me cover
that now the if the samsaram if you take
it as the previous what we call as a
vasanas and previous residual
Tendencies
right if you
um the chra if you look at it in another
way suppose say if I start
relaxing my
practice okay looking at it another way
if I start relaxing my practice if I'm
not fully committed to it no and then
what happen
the the subsequent to that what happens
is the previous the residual tendencies
in the mind will start Rising its head
that's another way to look at that so
what happens if I'm practicing
meditation and then if I don't practice
for some time then naturally we all see
all the previous Tendencies start coming
up and occupying our mind isn't it so
that is uh that's that's the way to
understand 26 actually
okay now what happens if that that comes
out then do we give up you know it is uh
mentally quite defeating isn't it
because you try it doesn't work right
doesn't work so what happens so now the
Rishi tells us in
27 y
the difficulties aam these difficulties
caused by these residual Tendencies
raising their ugly head because I'm
relaxing my because you have to be very
this a very very strict thing you have
to continue to follow
even right even the last also he was
following all this so we must do this
without that discipline that without
relaxation supposing if it raises it
head what do you do so they gives you
difficulty
then see they Hanam means to kill those
to remove those difficulties okay what
is the superior what is a good way to do
that is already been described which is
turn the Mind toward the indweller keep
on practicing it that is what bhagat say
that's what Swami say so put put this in
a very simple manner okay okay if the
thing comes up don't give up remove it
by practicing it continuing to practice
what has been described before which
is and right and starting with y
and number
now um
number 28
once
more
now when the mind is fully focused on
the talked thei told us about samadi
various types of samadi and various
powers that comes right and so what
happened
PR during this meditation this process
means means to meditation meditation is
English word so let it not get carried
away by
it so please always whenever you come
across English word
meditation uh don't get digressed my
suggestion would be immediately think of
it as when it immediately you know it is
12 and when you know
you know very well one is equal to 12
seconds of concentration so then you can
understand it more precisely so when you
do it that
way very means closely connected with so
when very closely connected
with what
happens so um various uh um
Powers comes isn't it that has already
described
that be
unconcerned with those various powers
that start manifesting from
within unconcerned let them come
absolutely not bothered with
it all
means it means you should absolutely by
all means at all time you know be
unconcerned with it because it is such a
slip slope is what parach says like
walking on a banana peel and how can you
walk on a banana peel and not fall down
so very it is like that extremely
slippery the moment one fraction of a
second you think oh I've got this you
slipped then you got to climb back again
so by all
means
unconcerned with
that with that
discrimination with that V that say
these powers are not what it is they are
all temporary no no no I'm going as ra
did absolutely I'm concerned with
that knowledge that that you
experience
is this is beautiful because what is
what
is completely one with all the time then
there is no differentiation at all how
does we spoken before when you when you
when you look at everything with
Selfless Love when you have a vision of
selfless love
as said once you know all thoughts are
innocent all beings are beautiful and
all actions are sacred where is a
differentiation so at that time where is
DH where is adarma nothing no nothing
like that okay and only when there is
adarma is present then you have to say d
but when everything is D only how do you
say it's like d doesn't have a name the
religion what we call it Religion Today
does not have a name because that was
the only religion at the time if if I'm
the only person in this whole world I
don't have to have a
name right
so now what happens when you completely
discorded unconcerned let them be you
not about you're not paying attention to
all
those is very important word and
abolutely UNC concerned with it because
that does not mean that you're trying to
negate it that the moment you say no no
I'm pay attention to it that means
you're concerned with it let them be you
know so many things are there you're not
bothered with it it should be like that
then that with that discrimination the
knowledge you you get what you
experience is
the samadi the Oneness with bhan that is
still clouded by The Cloud of
Dharma okay still final thing is still
not
there because then you think of what is
vir and what is non virt still that vir
was the ban bhan is beyond virtues
please remember that right so virtues
and lack of Virtues and all we created a
certain level right but still it is
clouded at that level with that
differentiation
[Music]
okay number
29 after that once you get that then
what happens
and
all difficulty the bondages created by
Karma the actions the actions are
binding us right all the time at that
point bondage of action that cees to
be actions leave
you they leave
you and that's only we can become
actionless not by refusing to do action
no it's not going to
happen okay and if you refuse to do
action your internal tendency thas
tendency may say yeah let meic be
postponed it let me not do it see what
happens your own gas themselves will
push you into doing that
action no way to escape from action
impossible when action knocks on your
door we are
bound we all slaves to our action right
now but this point the actions leave you
and because of action there are so many
difficulties all the problem comes in
because of action but we don't know how
to do the action that is K yoga is there
how to do the action we don't know so we
get into
difficulties but we are bound we can't
escape that leaves you that sees us to
be the bonds of action
remove or
removed there after that
okay number
more okay very
important at that time after that
see if you think about it in this in
this world of hours that each one of us
lives
in can I
[Music]
really interact all interactions we
have we always identify
something and identification is through
Nam and
rup we always have to have a name and a
form a name and a form name and a form
without
that isn't
it says you know we
all
only that's what we are all but we are
have additional two things and that's
where the problem
comes right the Nam andup go away what
is left only is left
all means the the
identification something that is
identified because we identify it the
moment we identify something we are
automatically limiting it because our
mind is limiting it isn't it it's like
doing calculus you know like x equal to
we start with hypothesis right
immediately we limit it even when you
look at any theorem and all that there's
always a boundary we draw even in
physics phys you know if you do quantum
mechanics you cannot do particle physics
I mean if you do wave mechanics you
cannot do particle physics right so it
is everything if we have to limit then
only we can understand because
intelligence cannot understand
intelligence itself isn't it so so the
identification and with that the moment
we identify what
happens that means it gets covered
covered means it gets Limited right that
is why even though everything is bhan
why we not able to see everything is
bhagan because we are limiting what we
see what we
experience isn't it that is called that
that covering that we ourselves put by
the limit by the identification process
so all covered something that is covered
by something because of the
identification process that's how
precisely thei is
explaining okay
time the all the things all the
knowledge we get by identifying and
therefore limiting it so many knowledge
we have even we may say we have explored
the limits of universe that's still a
limited knowledge isn't it that
knowledge so
that that
in so many types of knowledge we have
that we we feel proud of ourselves right
I've discovered this I've invented this
right so many things are there I
understood this right so whatever thing
that we have if you really be very
truthful to yourself you will see that
is a knowledge gained by identification
or limiting something and getting a
limited knowledge only but there are so
many types of knowledge we have I'm not
knocking that there each one of them is
beautiful but all all those knowledges
that we have okay that the knowing this
this indweller experiencing this
indweller getting to the stage where the
actions themselves leave you when you
are shining with the in the company of
the of the Atma of the
indweller
that that knowing that that experience
of that
no okay
from that perspective at that point when
you know that all the other infinite
knowledges that you have gained with all
the sense objects right with the
application of the intelligence with the
mind and whatever we call it right they
all become
Al they become Al they become
nothing not only insignificant they
become nothing actually
right it is like the classic thing of
Mir isn't it the moment I think there is
water you know but then when you really
know what happened to that it is
disappeared it become nothing
Al
okay the okay Al okay
number
31 afterward
therefore very
important after the actions leave then
something happens to the gas we all
bound by G the gas are the one that is
theet has got three strings only the
three gas with that you know is pulling
us right
[Music]
and means we've seen this before
something that's a result of that's a
fruit that's something that you get that
right means very important we say and
all this things but see
grma mean an order a
system of doing something right so
everything have a
system
now all the the three that we
have all the actions that we do as
bhagan teaches us in bhagat Gita we are
not doing it the problem is we think I
am doing this so I'm learning this I'm
speaking this I'm singing all those
things no no no that's a that's a misn
noral right that's actually
misunderstanding what is really
happening is the gas that you have they
are the ones who do that the gas the
three gas like the three levers is a
body that is basically uh nothing
different from the five elements but
activated by the life force
okay this little amount of air that we
that we breathe out then we breathe in
with that gives the so-called energy the
electricity so to speak right and then
the three gas then operate our body and
mind please remember that the body just
a tool the three gas operate the
mind now and the mind is is taken this
body in order to carry out it exhaust
its karma load now
the gas are the one that is doing all
the actions okay when you look at what
is activating your mind you know you
think one way now we call it tamas and
and we know that that we have understood
right so at this
point very important why do we do all
the actions
Swami next question comes if this is the
case gas are activating and I keep on
being bound by all the action what is
the Aram what is the essence the meaning
behind all this what's the objective of
all
this the essence the meaning the
objective of all the actions that we
do there a system associated with it it
is not haad it is not chaotic on from a
macro level this each one of us the
being dancing according to the gas there
is a system okay there is a reason for
why that is taken place
and the objective of that has been
attained which means simply speaking
this is the
explanation we are given this mind and
mind takes a body only to do one to give
love and receive love that's all it is
that's the only reason we have taken
birth there's no other reason which we
refuse to do so we keep on taking birth
right and
suffer now the moment the mind is
focused on the love that is within me
and I in the company of that love what
happens I've achieved the
objective that's all it is the mind has
to go to toward love and be love itself
not be thinking in a limited way I'm so
and so you know I have to get this
million dollars all these are all noise
okay but the moment the mind really goes
to what is permanent and keeps it
company and the moment I keep the
company of the love within me I'm
automatically giving out love that is
the nature of that prma prma cannot
abstain from sharing from giving out
from from uh spreading from expanding
that prma it's not possible that is his
nature the moment I'm automatically
everything is intruded that's what we
call that's why the selflessness is so
important that is why selflessness is
maybe sound like an impossible task to
achieve that is why bhagan says at least
reduce your selfishness let's start on
the process first you know marathon race
is not achieved by covering this 26
miles in one step taken one step at a
time so redu selfishness the moment I
reduce selfish one amount of selfishness
I become that much more loving if I
reduce more of that selfishness I become
more loving it's as simple as that then
finally I'm in that contact with that at
that
point the
objective of the system that has been
set up which is the purpose of K yoga
that is exact that's why BH Karm yoga is
followed by karmas yoga mean thing to do
with then what is then there is Yum
which is a sacrifice associated with
that all this is beautifully explained
okay the essense of this is explained
that so beautifully bhagan teaches that
so it is the the system of action if you
want to call it okay the system of
action for all of us for everything in
the universe is acting nothing is Idle
impossible everything has got the three
gas so but what is the system that's a
system that's been set up and what is
the objective of the system what is it
aim to to achieve that
that has been achieved the moment it is
achieved what happens
the okay the gas have achieved their
objective finally so
the fulfill their objective the reason
for their
creation you understand yeah so that
is fath this is so important ban is
beyond the gas so now how the Rishi
beautifully takes us takes us through
sadii through
through and to achieve this samadi state
and not being concerned with the powers
that come in the process when you do
that then you come come to this state of
samadi called dhaha samadi there is
still this virtue is little bit left at
that point the actions leave you the the
actions leave you the purpose of gas are
also
achieved now you're going to the stage
beyond the
gas becoming one with the
indweller you
understand 32
once
more immediately moment at every moment
okay we think you know it is time is now
8:21 and the next second 8:2 22 like
that we think right so we think of it in
discrete form you know how many seconds
like no time is not like that
between 1 second to the next second it
is time is still continuous right our
measurement we limited it this is again
we put a clouding on our understanding
isn't it but that we now for us to
understand we put a limit but then you
go to the minutest measure of time which
the Ries have called have given as the
amount of time for the one the light
wave to go through 18 atoms okay but
that is only one measure that's the
tiniest measure of time okay that our
have given now from there Cham come so
Cham take it as one moment if you want
to call it okay so look look
at
progi um PR Yogi means the very
important it's a
see what happens to one moment to the
next moment and the moment after that
the moment after that there is a a
cooperation that is taking place in the
time itself right and that is what the
progi means cooperation okay but
basically moment to moment is the way we
can understand it in English moment to
moment okay you understand
and the time is such a
continu that it does not resist it says
no I'm going to go on strike and I'm
beautifully inherent cooperation that's
what Yogi means cooperation so moment to
moment
nowor sorry
means every moment to moment we perceive
something we experience with our five
senses right the we covered that right
every moment to moment we perceiving we
experience something so understand up to
that point okay that is what means
and means
what what do we what is the thing that
we perceive moment to moment okay with
all our senses that has got to have some
end isn't it isn't it it continuously we
are perceiving and everything keeps on
changing changing changing so many
things but this thing has
place okay at the extreme end of all the
things that we perceive moment to moment
moment to moment to moment
okay okay
the if you were to look at it in a
simple way let me explain and then go
through the meaning of the remaining
words we all
know that our perceptions
change our experiences change that
everybody agrees on a personal level
right we change it but we continue to
perceive isn't it that doesn't
stop now we also know that what all this
kidos scopic changes and and game that
is going on okay what is the end of
it okay that it's got end somewhere the
interesting thing
is the even though the constancy in the
change is there changes we know the con
there is something constant there
but we are perceiving only the
changes when you become one with the
constancy itself what happens then you
understand all the changes that have
taking place isn't it everything bhan
says is you're all on your journey
towards the Lotus feet only but I don't
understand it right now when I achieve
that objective and I embrace bhagan
Lotus feet then I can understand the
pathway I taken all the things that took
place isn't it so that is the meaning of
the okay so the Sutra so now going
back moment to
moment moment to moment
and all the that is perceived
okay at the end of it okay what do I
understand the system that has taken
place right why all this how all this
take place at that point it doesn't
become necessary or important at all but
then you get the knowledge of the system
of action the karma that is the the how
how else say the the the the bhan
design the puppet PL to put it in
another way Thea of all the the system
that is existing that the end you
understand
it while while you're undergoing the
changes you cannot understand it that is
the meaning of it only at the end it
becomes clear so when due to the sadii
when actions leave you the gas also have
now ceased to be because they have
achieved their objective then you get
the knowledge of basically
creation why creation
right that you
understand 33
[Music]
remember the actions
are pulled and pushed by
theas please remember that
now is describing even the gas have
achieved their
objective right so they don't have to
function anymore the gas cause your
actions the actions the cause the
bondage because we don't know how to do
the
action right now you think the reverse
path the actions are left the gas have
achieve their objective at that point
what happens that is what is describing
very important stage very important
bir we also we all
know know we saw every mother knows that
right means birth that's what now what
is PR is returning to the original
stage
okay which is birthless
stage is birthless
returning to the original
[Music]
stage the
um yes puru we have talked about it
right Pura is indwell the essence ban
other words one becoming one with the
Selfless
Love at that point what is there only un
means we call it as one way to look at
it is emptiness another way to look at
it is vacant but no it is always full
there is nothing
lacking in that
right see when you talk about emptiness
only when there is something that is not
that is not full then you talk of
emptiness isn't it but suppose if there
is nothing to compare with all the words
we describe are all relative in absolute
thing there is nothing more nothing
less right
that okay the then now uh will combine
the word to
understand the gas have become empty
that's easy way to understand what does
it mean fulfill their OB
they no longer like the way we use
something and and discard it once it use
is gone the gas have fulfilled their
objective the job is done that's it they
become empty they emptied out at this
point remember the gas become
samap at that
time the means
Ence is
IND what is the Ence
returning
to returning to the right returning to
the original stage the having been
emptied okay to put it in aoll
way shining in one's own self effulgence
established firmly in
that there is no
differentiation understand there's no
differentiation it is not like one
becoming the other there's only one as
sh Baba says the wheel of Maya which is
the small piece of cloth that separates
you and from me why don't you remove it
is what he say me I can't remove it you
remove it one that is removed it's one
there's no difference that is
prti right now we all prati we all
established in not I'm established in me
thinking I'm so and so you are
established in thinking you are so and
so what happens if that thinking goes
away feeling of Separation goes
away right feeling of separation is the
Maya nothing
else nothing else is the feeling of
Separation goes away what happens
one
certainly in this case chti means the
Atma shines in its own
self okay
with bhagan
Grace Swami has brought us to the last
sura of pan yoga it is only his grace
absolutely I'm not at all even even an
iota of qualification to even share or
talk about it other than interest that's
all a sincere interest interest so it's
only bhagan is the one who has taught us
through this and whatever
clarifications that uh that we may have
obtained is all only due to his grace
and any confusion or lack of
understanding also that we may have got
that is also his grace only and he is
the only teacher that we should look to
the the same bhagan who in each one of
us to understand stand to get
clarification uh of of such an exalted
piece of knowledge and as Swami says
nobody uh living in this world can
describe can explain panal yoga Sutra it
has uh it has to be personally Journey
has to be taken undertaken and
personally
experienced so what we have done is gone
through the slum and hopefully that has
Ved some interest to take us on to the
next step of seeking uh the only Guru
there is who seated in our
heart om
[Music]
om shant shant shant